Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications
Source: Section 109.4
Requirement ID: CC-18

109.4 Compensation for Changes.

A. General
1. If the Department changes the contract, as provided in Section 104.2, Contract Changes, and the
contractor provides timely notice in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract
Changes, the engineer will determine the pricing method for the change following the sequence
specified below in Sections 109.4.B through D.

2. Compensation for a change in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for Changes,
constitutes full and complete compensation for performing the change.

3. The Department reserves the right to provide the materials for performing the changed work.
The contractor is not entitled to payment for the cost of these materials or mark ups on the
value of these materials.

4. If the change includes a time extension for compensable delays as provided by Section 108.7,
Extensions of Contract Time, the Department will compensate the contractor for the costs
associated with the time extension in accordance with Section 109.6, Compensation for Delay.

5. The Department will not pay for non-allowable charges specified in Section 109.5, Non-
Allowable Charges, or duplicate payments that may result from the application of Section 109.6,
Compensation for Delay, or any other provisions of the contract.

B. Unit Prices
Before proceeding to another pricing method, the engineer will attempt to price and pay for the
change using unit prices in the contractor's proposal. The Department will pay for the change
using unit prices when the change incorporates work that does not differ significantly from the
work in the original bid.

C. Negotiated Prices
1. If the engineer and the contractor cannot agree on compensation for the change in accordance
with Section 109.4.B, Unit Prices, the engineer and the contractor will attempt to negotiate unit
or lump sum prices for the changed work using 1 or more of the following methods:
a. Unit bid prices for similar pay items adjusted for increased or decreased costs.
b. Historical unit bid prices for similar work and quantities.
c. Unit prices determined by the Department.
d. Cost analysis of labor, material, equipment, and mark ups as allowed in Section 109.4.D, Force
Account.

2. Negotiated mark-ups for subcontractor work may not exceed that provided for in Section
109.4.D.14, Subcontracting.

3. Within 7 calendar days of the Department's request, submit a written proposal that includes
pricing, cost justification, and a schedule for performing the changed work.

4. The Department will respond within 7 calendar days after receiving the contractor's proposal.

5. The Department and the contractor can mutually agree in writing to extend the 7-day time
limits.

D. Force Account.
1. If the engineer and contractor are unable to agree to a price for a change in accordance with
Sections 109.4.B, Unit Prices, or C, Negotiated Prices, the engineer may direct the contractor to
perform all or part of the change using the force account pricing method. Obtain the engineer's
written approval before proceeding with force account work.

2. When the engineer directs the contractor to perform the change using the force account pricing
method, the Department will pay the contractor as specified in Sections 109.4.D.5. through 14.

3. Prior to starting work using the force account pricing method, the engineer will meet with the
contractor to determine and agree on the labor, equipment, and materials needed to perform
the change.

4. The engineer will make the final determination concerning what labor, equipment, and
materials are needed to perform the change.

5. Follow the engineer's direction when performing the change.

6. The Department will not pay for the change in excess of the agreed amount using the force
account pricing method if the engineer was not given an opportunity to review and approve the
labor, equipment, and materials proposed by the contractor to perform the change and if the
contractor did not follow the engineer's direction when performing the change.

7. Labor.
a. The Department will compensate the contractor for labor at the actual rate of wage paid and
shown on the certified payroll for every hour that the labor and working supervision worked
exclusively on the changed work.
b. The Department will pay for a foreman in charge of the changed work as direct labor and not
in the overhead markup.
c. The Department considers the cost of home office personnel, project executives, project
managers, superintendents, general foreman, clerical personnel, assistants, and all other
management and supervisory personnel as compensated by the mark ups allowed by Section
109.4.D.12, Overhead.
d. Unless already included in the wage rates paid, the Department will also pay the actual labor-
related costs of health and welfare benefits, pension funds, or other benefits, provided those
payments are required by a collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract
generally applicable to the classes of labor employed to perform the change.

8. Bond, Insurance, and Tax
a. For bond premiums; property damage, liability, and workers compensation insurance
premiums; unemployment insurance contributions; and social security taxes, the Department
will compensate the contractor for the actual incremental cost necessarily and directly
resulting from the performance of the change.
b. Provide documentation, satisfactory to the Department, of the rate or rates paid for bonds,
insurance, and taxes.

9. Materials.
a. The Department will compensate the contractor for the cost of materials the contractor
provided and used for the changed work.
b. The material purchaser is the entity that purchased the material to perform the change. For
example, if the change requires fabrication of structural steel, the steel fabricator that
purchased the steel to fabricate the structural steel for the change is the material purchaser,
not the contractor.
c. The cost of contractor-furnished materials is the cost to the purchaser, together with
transportation charges paid by the purchaser, except as the following apply:
i. If a cash or trade discount by the actual supplier of the material is offered or available to the
purchaser, credit that amount to the Department even if the purchaser did not take the
discount.
ii. For materials obtained from a supplier or source owned wholly or in part by the purchaser,
the Department will pay the lowest of the following:
(1) The price of similar materials previously purchased from a supplier.
(2) The price of materials used by the purchaser on other Department projects.
iii. The Department will pay the current wholesale price for materials if it is lower than the
contractor's purchase price from its wholly or partially owned supplier.
d. If the purchaser procures materials by methods other than a direct purchase and direct billing
from the supplier, the engineer will pay the price paid to the supplier, plus the costs incurred
in the handling the materials.
e. If the contractor uses materials to complete the change that were taken from the contractor's
stock, submit an affidavit certifying that the materials came from the contractor's stock, the
quantity was used in the changed work, and the price and transportation costs represent the
contractor's actual costs.
f. If the engineer determines that the cost of materials for the changed work is excessive or the
contractor fails to provide substantiation for material costs from the supplier, the Department
will pay the lowest current wholesale price for the materials. The Department will pay for the
required quantities delivered to the project site, less available cash or trade discounts offered
by the actual supplier of the material.

10. Equipment.
a. General.
i. The Department will pay for each hour that the contractor uses an approved piece of
equipment to perform the changed work.
ii. Use equipment that the engineer agrees is in good operating condition.
iii. Describe the equipment used in detail to document it for payment.
iv. Select equipment of suitable size and suitable capacity for the changed work.
v. The engineer will determine the suitability of the equipment.
vi. In the event the contractor elects to use equipment of a higher rental or hourly ownership
cost than is suitable for performing the work associated with the change, the Department
will pay the rate applicable to the suitable equipment.
vii. If there is a differential in the rate of pay of the operator of oversize or higher-rate
equipment, the Department will pay the rate of an operator of the suitable equipment.
viii. The Department will not pay for the use of small tools. Small tools are defined as tools or
equipment with a daily ownership and operating cost or daily rental rate and operating cost
of less than $5.00. The Department will not pay for owned equipment not listed in the
Rental Rate Blue Book (Blue Book) published by EquipmentWatch that cost less than $1,500
when new.
ix. The Department will pay for subcontractor-owned equipment as "Owned Equipment," as
set forth below. The Department will pay for leased or rented equipment or equipment
hired from a subcontractor as "Leased, Rented, or Hired Equipment," as set forth below.
x. The Department will not pay standby time for equipment that operated for more than 8
hours in a day or 40-hours in a week.
xi. The Department will pay standby time for equipment that operated less than 8-hours in a
day or less than 40-hours in a week. The Department will base standby time on the
difference between the operating time on a normal working day and 8 hours per day or the
difference between the operating time in a normal work week and 40 hours per week.
xii. The Department will not pay for the time equipment is idle on a day that is not a normal
working day.
b. Owned Equipment.
i. The Department will compensate the contractor for contractor-owned equipment at a rate
determined from the Blue Book.
ii. Owned equipment is equipment and plant owned directly by the contractor or by entities
that are divisions, affiliates, subsidiaries, or in any other way related to the contractor or its
parent company.
iii. Use the Blue Book in the following manner:
(1) Determine the hourly rate by dividing the monthly rate by 176. Do not use the weekly,
hourly, or daily rates.
(2) The Department will pay for the number of hours that the equipment or plant is used to
perform the changed work.
(3) The Department will not pay for more than 176 hours per calendar month.
(4) Use the current edition of the Blue Book to establish the rates. The applicable current
edition is the one that is current as of the first day of work performed on the change. That
rate applies throughout the time it takes to perform the changed work.
(5) Make the area adjustment.
(6) Make the equipment life adjustment in accordance with the Blue Book rate adjustment
tables.
(7) Charge the same rate for equipment used on overtime as charged for regular hours.
(8) Use the Blue Book operating rate for each hour the equipment or plant was in operation for
the change. The Blue Book operating rate does not apply to idle time regardless of the
cause.
(9) The Department will not compensate the contractor for equipment idle time unless the
equipment was held on the project site at the engineer's written request.
(10) The Department compensates for idle time at 1/2 the rate established in (1) through (6)
above.
(11) Compensation for idle time will not exceed 8-hours in a day and will not exceed 40-hours in
a week.
(12) The rates established above include the cost of fuel, oil, lubrication, supplies, attachments,
repairs, overhaul, and maintenance of any kind, depreciation, storage, overhead, profits,
insurance, incidentals, and all other costs.
(13) Do not include operator costs in the hourly equipment or plant rate.
(14) If the Blue Book does not have a rate for a piece of equipment, the engineer will establish a
rate determined by audit in accordance with Section 107.15, Audits.
iv. If owned equipment required for the changed work is not available at the project site, the
Department will pay the move-in cost of transporting the equipment to the project site and
the move-out cost of moving the equipment off the site in accordance with the following:
(1) Obtain the engineer's approval of the equipment location before transporting the
equipment to the project site.
(2) If the contractor chooses to keep the equipment at the project site to perform work other
than the work associated with the change, the Department will not pay for the move-out
costs.
(3) If the contractor chooses to return the equipment to a location other than the original
location, the Department will pay a move-out cost that does not exceed the move-in cost.
(4) Calculate the equipment transportation cost to and from the project site using the hourly
rates for labor and equipment determined in accordance with the labor and equipment
provisions of this specification. The Department will not pay moving costs that exceed the
costs of moving the equipment using an independent hauler instead of the contractor's own
forces.
(5) If the contractor uses an independent hauler to transport contractor-owned equipment, the
Department will pay the invoice price paid to the hauler and 50 percent of the hourly
ownership costs as determined above in accordance with the Blue Book.
(6) Transportation costs include loading and unloading.
c. Rented Equipment
i. If the contractor does not own the required equipment, inform the engineer of the need to
rent the equipment and of the rental rate before mobilizing the equipment to the site and
using it to perform the changed work.
ii. The Department will compensate the contractor for the rented equipment by paying the
rental rate for the time it is used to perform the changed work.
iii. The Department will compensate the contractor for the cost of moving the rented
equipment on and off the project if the moves are necessary only because of the changed
work.
iv. For idle rental equipment that must remain on the site because of the engineer's written
directive, the Department will pay for the rented equipment at the rental rate established
above for rented equipment, not to exceed 8-hours in a day or 40-hours in a week.
v. The Department will not pay for rented equipment costs in excess of the actual cost paid for
the rental.
vi. Provide a copy of the paid receipt or canceled check for the rental expense incurred.
vii. The Department will pay the operating costs of rented equipment used for the changed
work based on the Blue Book operating costs for the same piece of equipment.

11. Daily Records
a. Use the Department's Daily Force Account form to document daily the labor, equipment, and
materials used to perform the changed work.
b. Complete the Daily Force Account form to provide a clear distinction between the changed
work and all other work.
c. Provide all information required by the Daily Force Account form, including:
i. The name, classification, date, daily hours, total hours, rate, and extension for each laborer
and foreman.
ii. The designation, number, date, daily hours, total hours, rental rate, including a copy of the
Blue Book pages used, and extension for each piece of equipment and associated
attachments.
iii. The quantities of materials, prices, and extensions. Substantiate material costs with copies
of vendor's invoices. Submit vendor invoices with the Daily Force Account forms or, if not
available that day, submit the invoices with subsequent Daily Force Account forms. Failure
to submit vendor's invoices within 60 calendar days after the date of material delivery, or
within 15 calendar days after completing the changed work, whichever occurs first, will
result in the engineer establishing the material costs. The engineer will use the lowest
current wholesale prices for similar materials, available in the quantities used for the
changed work, delivered to the project, less any available discounts.
iv. The cost of material transportation.
v. The cost of insurance premiums for property damage, liability, and workers compensation
insurances; unemployment insurance contributions; bonds; and social security taxes.
d. At the end of each workday:
i. The engineer will compare the records the engineer kept with the completed Daily Force
Account form the contractor submitted.
ii. The engineer and the contractor will review and attempt to reconcile differences with the
Daily Force Account form record.
iii. After the engineer and the contractor agree on the content of the Daily Force Account form
submitted at the end of the workday, both parties will sign the form.
e. The Department will use the completed and signed Daily Force Account form as the basis for
determining the amount due the contractor. However, the Department may subsequently
increase or decrease the compensation paid based on an audit of the contractor's records.
Allow the Department access to force account compensation cost records for inspection or
audit in accordance with Section 107.15, Audits.
f. If the contractor fails to submit the Daily Force Account form daily or refuses to sign the Daily
Force Account form, the Department will use the engineer's records for payment.

12. Overhead.
a. The Department defines overhead to include the following:
i. Home office expenses, including the salaries and expenses of executive officers, area or
regional managers, managers, supervisors, and engineering, estimating, administrative, and
clerical personnel. Home office expenses are expenses incurred by the contractor not
charged directly to any one project. These expenses are identified as general and
administrative expenses.
ii. Field office expenses, including project executives, project managers, general
superintendents, superintendents, assistants, and non-working foremen. Field office
expenses are expenses incurred by the contractor on a specific project but not charged to a
particular item of work. For example, the cost of a job site trailer is a field office expense,
but the cost of a cubic yard of concrete used in a bridge footing is not because there is an
item, or items, for the bridge work.
iii. Cost of small tools, such as shovels, picks, axes, saws, bars, sledges, lanterns, jacks, cables,
pails, wrenches, and the cost of other miscellaneous supplies and services.
iv. Computers, copiers, and other office equipment.
b. The Department will compensate the contractor for overhead at 10 percent of the following:
i. Bare material costs calculated in accordance with Item 9 above, not including freight on
board (FOB) costs.
ii. Direct labor costs calculated in accordance with Item 7 above.
iii. Equipment costs calculated in accordance with Item 10 above.
iv. The Department may pay for extraordinary overhead expenses, such as hiring of additional
supervisory personnel or purchase of a specialty small tool the contractor has to purchase
specifically for the changed work. The Department will only pay for extraordinary overhead
expenses if the engineer agreed to the costs before the contractor incurred the costs.

13. Profit.
a. The Department will compensate the contractor for profit at five percent of the following:
i. Bare material costs calculated in accordance with Item 9 above, not including FOB.
ii. Direct labor costs calculated in accordance with Item 7 above.

14. Subcontracting.
a. For administration costs in connection with subcontract work, the Department will pay an
amount equal to 10 percent for subcontractor work up to $100,000 and five percent on work
exceeding $100,000 determined in accordance with Items 7 through 13 above.

E. Acceleration.
1. The engineer may direct the contractor, in writing, to accelerate the work.

2. If the engineer directs the contractor to complete the work early or directs the contractor to
accelerate to mitigate excusable delays and accelerating the work will result in added costs,
provide notice of a change in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract Changes.

3. The contractor is not entitled to compensation for the acceleration unless the contractor has:
a. Provided notice in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract Changes.
b. The engineer directed the acceleration in writing.
c. The engineer directed the contractor to complete the work in less than the contract time or to
mitigate an excusable delay instead of granting a time extension.

4. The engineer will compensate the contractor for directed acceleration in accordance with
Section 109.4, Compensation for Changes.

5. If the Department uses the force account method to compensate the contractor for
acceleration, the Department will modify Section 109.4.D, Force Account, as follows:
a. If acceleration requires working overtime or additional shifts, the Department will pay for the
overtime shift premium and the health and welfare benefits, pension fund, or other benefits
costs directly related to the overtime shift premium. The Department will pay for benefits
required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts applicable to the
classes of labor used for the changed work. The Department will also pay for workers
compensation insurance premiums, unemployment insurance contributions, and social
security taxes.
b. The Department will not pay for additional supervision to oversee work during overtime hours
or during additional shifts. Compensation for this supervision is included in the allowable labor
overhead markup.
c. The Department will pay for equipment used during overtime hours or on extended shifts at
the same rate used for regular time or normal shifts.
d. If the engineer requests the contractor to expedite material deliveries to accelerate the work,
the Department will pay the expediting costs.

F. Payments
Compensation for changed work paid, in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for
Changes, is full and complete compensation for the changed work, except to the extent that the
contractor is also entitled to compensation for an excusable and compensable time extension due
to the changed work. The Department will determine the contractor's entitlement to a
compensable time extension in accordance with Section 108.7, Extensions of Contract Time. The
Department will determine compensation for the time extension in accordance with Section
109.6, Compensation for Delay.
