Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications + General Notices
Source: Section 104.2
Requirement ID: CC-11

104.2 Contract Changes.

A. General.
1. The contract is not modified, altered, or otherwise changed by any oral promise, statement, or
representation made either by the Department or the contractor, unless such modification,
alteration, or change is reduced to writing in accordance with the contract.

2. The Department reserves the right to change the contract at any time before the contractor's
acceptance of the final estimate. After the contractor's acceptance of the final estimate, the
Department may only change the contract based on the results of an audit performed in
accordance with Section 107.15, Audits.

3. Changes do not invalidate the contract or release the surety and the contractor agrees to
perform the work as changed.

4. Proceed with a change only after receiving written direction from the engineer.

5. If the contractor believes it has encountered a change in accordance with Sections 104.2.B,
Significant Changes in the Character of Work, 104.2.C, Differing Site Conditions, 104.2.D,
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer, 104.2.E, Extra Work, or 104.2.F, Eliminated
Items, provide notice as required by these clauses and as required by Section 104.3, Notification
of Contract Changes.

6. Failure to provide notice as specified by these clauses is a waiver of the contractor's entitlement
to an increase in the contract price or contract time.

7. If the contractor complies with the notice requirements of these clauses and the engineer
determines that there is a change, the Department will compensate the contractor for the
change in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for Changes, and provide a time
extension in accordance with Section 108.7, Extensions of Contract Time.

8. In Sections 104.2.B, Significant Changes in the Character of Work, 104.2.C, Differing Site
Conditions, and 104.2.D, Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer, the term "adjustment"
means compensation in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for Changes, and the
granting of a time extension in accordance with Section 108.7, Extensions of Contract Time.

B. Significant Changes in the Character of Work.
1. The Department reserves the right to make, in writing, at any time before the contractor's
acceptance of the final estimate, changes in quantities and alterations to the work as are
necessary to satisfactorily complete the project. After the contractor's acceptance of the final
estimate, the Department may only make changes in the quantities and alternations in the work
based on the results of an audit performed in accordance with Section 107.15, Audits. Changes
in quantities and alterations will not invalidate the contract or release the surety, and the
contractor agrees to perform the work as altered.

2. The Department will make a contract adjustment, excluding anticipated profit, for alterations or
changes in quantities that significantly change the character of the work or that cause other work to become significantly different in character. The Department and the contractor shall
agree on the basis for the adjustment before the contractor performs the work. If the
Department and the contractor cannot agree on a basis for the adjustment, the Department will
make an adjustment either for or against the contractor in accordance with Sections 109.4,
Compensation for Changes, and 108.7, Extensions for Contract Time.

3. If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work,
the Department will pay for the altered work as provided elsewhere in the contract.

4. The Department will apply the term "significant change" only to the following circumstances:
a. When the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that
involved or included in the original proposed construction; or
b. When a major item of work, as defined elsewhere in the contract, is increased in excess of 125
percent or decreased below 75 percent of the original contract quantity. Any allowance for an
increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of 125 percent of original pay
item quantity, or in case of a decrease below 75 percent, to the actual amount of work
performed.
c. When a specialty item of work, as defined elsewhere in the contract, is increased in excess of
125 percent or decreased below 75 percent of the original contract quantity. Any allowance
for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of 125 percent of original
pay item quantity, or in case of a decrease below 75 percent, to the actual amount of work
performed.

C. Differing Site Conditions.
1. During the progress of the work, if the Department or the contractor encounters subsurface or
latent physical conditions at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or
unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature, differing materially from those ordinarily
encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract, the
party discovering the conditions shall promptly notify the other party in accordance with Section
104.3, Notification of Contract Changes, of the specific differing conditions before the site is
disturbed and before the affected work is performed.

2. Upon receipt of the notice provided in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract
Changes, the engineer will investigate the conditions, and if it is determined that the conditions
materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the
performance of any work under the contract, the Department will make an adjustment,
excluding anticipated profits, and will modify the contract in writing accordingly. The engineer
will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment is warranted.

3. The Department will make no contract adjustment that results in a benefit to the contractor
unless the contractor provided the required notice in accordance with Section 104.3,
Notification of Contract Changes.

D. Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer.
1. If the Department suspends or delays performance of all or any portion of the work in writing
for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated, customary, or inherent to the
construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time
is due as a result of such suspension or delay, the contractor shall submit to the engineer notice
in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract Changes. The contractor shall then submit a request for adjustment within 7 calendar days after receiving the notice to resume
work. The contractor's request shall set forth the reasons and support for the adjustment.

2. Upon receipt of notice, the engineer will evaluate the contractor's request. If the engineer
agrees that the cost or time required for contract performance increased as a result of a
suspension, and the suspension is excusable and compensable in accordance with Section 108.7,
Extensions of Contract Time, the engineer will make an adjustment, excluding profit, and will
modify the contract in writing accordingly. The engineer will notify the contractor of the
determination whether or not an adjustment is warranted.

3. The Department will make no contract adjustment unless the contractor submitted notice of the
suspension in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of Contract Changes, and submitted a
request for adjustment within 7 calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work.

4. The Department will make no contract adjustment under this clause to the extent that the
suspension or delay resulted from any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or
excluded under any other term or condition of the contract.

E. Extra Work.
1. The engineer may direct the contractor to perform extra work. Extra work is work added to the
contract for which there is no pay item.

2. The Department will pay for extra work in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for
Changes, and will provide a time extension for this work in accordance with Section 108.7,
Extensions of Contract Time.

F. Eliminated Items.
1. Should the Department find a pay item unnecessary for completion of the work, the engineer
may eliminate the item from the contract.

2. If the contractor completed a portion of the work associated with an eliminated pay item,
before the Department eliminated the item, the Department will reimburse the contractor for
the completed work as follows:
a. For completed quantities of work, the Department will pay the contractor for each unit of
completed work at the contract unit price. If the eliminated pay item is a major item and the
reduction in quantity results in a significant change in the character of the work as defined in
Section 104.2.B., Significant Changes in the Character of Work, the Department will pay the
contractor for each unit of completed work in accordance with Section 104.2.B, Significant
Changes in the Character of Work.
b. For partially completed work, the Department will reimburse the contractor for the partially
completed work in accordance with Section 109.4, Compensation for Changes.
c. Materials the Department paid for will become the Department's property.

3. The contractor is not entitled to reimbursement for an eliminated pay item in excess of 75
percent of the bid amount for the pay item. The only exception to this limit is when the
documented material costs alone exceed 75 percent of the bid amount of the eliminated pay
item. If this occurs, then the contractor is entitled to the documented material cost but not
entitled to reimbursement for an eliminated pay item in excess of 95 percent of the bid amount
for the pay item. The material remains the property of the Department and will be delivered to
the Department's district maintenance yard.
