Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications + project metadata
Source: Section 108.7
Requirement ID: CC-16

108.7 Extensions of Contract Time.

A. General.
1. Prosecute the work continuously and effectively, with the least possible delay so as to complete
all the work within the contract time.

2. Upon encountering an excusable delay that meets the criteria specified in Sections 108.7.B,
Excusable, Non-Compensable Delays, or 108.7.C, Excusable, Compensable Delays, submit a
written request to the engineer for a contract time extension in accordance with Section 104.3,
Notification of Contract Changes.

3. Failure to provide timely notice of a delay, in accordance with Section 104.3, Notification of
Contract Changes, constitutes a waiver of the right to a time extension for the delay.

4. The Department will only extend the contract time if the contractor experiences an excusable
delay to work on the critical path shown on the approved progress schedule that delays the
scheduled substantial completion date based on the contract time.

5. The Department will use the same criteria to extend the contract time for a milestone date as it
uses to determine an extension of contract time for substantial completion.

6. The engineer will evaluate delays and determine the time extension due based on the following:
a. The progress schedules submitted to, and approved by, the Department. The engineer will not
use schedules that were not submitted and approved by the Department or schedules the
contractor created after the delay occurred.
b. Failure to submit and receive approval of a progress schedule or failure to maintain the
progress schedule in accordance with the requirements specified in Section 108.4, Progress
Schedule, constitutes a waiver of entitlement to a time extension.
c. The Department will only consider granting time extensions for delays to the critical path not
caused by the contractor.
d. The progress schedule relevant to the determination of a time extension is the progress
schedule submitted to and approved by the Engineer that was in force when the delay was
experienced. For example, if the Department determines that extra work is required and the
change order for this work is dated June 2, then the contractor would use the last progress
schedule submitted and approved by the Department prior to June 2 to show entitlement to a
time extension.
e. When submitting a request for a time extension, comply with the following requirements:
i. Use time impact analysis (TIA) to identify and measure critical delays that have not yet
occurred. Do not use this method to evaluate delays that have already occurred. In general
terms, perform a TIA as follows:
(1) Develop a "mini" schedule for the changed work. This schedule is known as a fragnet;
(2) identify the current accepted schedule and record the scheduled completion date on that
schedule;
(3) insert the fragnet into the current schedule by properly linking the fragnet with the existing
activities in the current accepted schedule;
(4) recalculate the current schedule with the fragnet inserted and record this scheduled
completion date;
(5) the difference in the calculated scheduled completion dates between the current schedule
and the schedule calculated with a properly inserted and properly composed fragnet is the
delay attributable to the changed work. The engineer will base the time extension due, if
any, on this delay.
ii. Use a contemporaneous analysis when evaluating delays that have already occurred. In
general terms, perform a contemporaneous analysis as follows:
(1) Identify the most recent accepted schedule with a data date before the start of the
delay being evaluated;
(2) identify each accepted schedule in effect during the delay and the schedule with a data date
that immediately follows the conclusion of the delay;
(3) identify the critical path each day from immediately before the start of the delay to the
schedule immediately following the delay;
(4) determine whether the delay falls on the critical path;
(5) if the delay does not fall on the critical path, then no project delay occurred and no time
extension is due;
(6) if the delay falls on the critical path, then determine the number of days the critical path is
delayed. The engineer will base the time extension due, if any, on this delay.

7. The engineer will review a time extension request and determine if a time extension is due.

8. The engineer will measure contract time extensions using working days for working day
contracts and calendar days for calendar day contracts.

9. If approved, the engineer will prepare a change order to increase or decrease the contract time.

B. Excusable, Non-Compensable Delays.
1. Excusable, non-compensable delays are delays that neither the contractor nor the Department
could have foreseen. These delays are not the fault or responsibility of the contractor or the
Department.

2. The Department will not compensate the contractor for the costs associated with an excusable,
non-compensable delay.

3. Excusable, non-compensable delays include delays due to:
a. Unforeseen events such as hurricanes, fires, floods, tornadoes, lightning strikes, earthquakes,
or epidemics.
b. Material delivery delays resulting from events or actions that the contractor, its
subcontractors, and suppliers could not foresee or avoid, and were not responsible for.
c. Civil disturbances or terrorism.
d. Labor strikes not caused by improper acts or omissions of the contractor, subcontractor, or
supplier that are beyond the contractor's, subcontractor's, and supplier's power to settle.
e. The added quantity of a major item of work where the added quantity exceeds 125 percent of
the approximate quantity shown in the bid proposal.
f. Utilities, including delays caused by the utility's failure to timely perform its work or
unanticipated conflicts between the utility's facilities and the work.
g. Railroads.
h. Acts of government or political subdivisions other than the Department.
j. All other delays not the contractor's or Department's fault or responsibility that could not
have been reasonably foreseen by the contractor or the Department.

4. Weather delays are non-compensable. The engineer will determine contract time extensions
due to weather in accordance with Section 108.7.F, Weather Delays.

C. Excusable, Compensable Delays.
1. Excusable, compensable delays are the Department's responsibility.

2. Excusable, compensable delays include:
a. Changed work as specified in Sections 104.2.C, Differing Site Conditions, and 104.2.E, Extra
Work.
b. Changed work as specified in Section 104.2.B, Significant Changes in the Character of Work,
except delays due to significant changes caused by increases in quantity, which are non-
compensable.
c. Delays due to an engineer-ordered suspension in accordance with Section 104.2.D,
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer.

D. Non-Excusable Delays.
1. Non-excusable delays are the contractor's responsibility. Non-excusable delays are not
compensable.

2. Non-excusable delays include:
a. Insolvency or mismanagement of the contractor, a subcontractor, or a supplier.
b. Slow material delivery when the material was available in warehouse stock or when delivery
was delayed for reasons of late ordering, or financial considerations.
c. The contractor's failure to provide sufficient forces and equipment to maintain progress.
d. Plant and equipment failure, failure to provide and maintain equipment in good mechanical
condition, or failure to provide for immediate emergency repairs.
e. Conditions on the project the contractor could have foreseen or anticipated, such as traffic.

E. Concurrent Delays
1. Concurrent delays are independent critical delays that occur on the same dates. When a non-
excusable delay is concurrent with an excusable delay, there is no entitlement to a contract time
extension for the time the non-excusable delay is concurrent with the excusable delay. When an
excusable, non-compensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay, there is entitlement to a contract time extension, but there is no entitlement to compensation for the period the
non-compensable delay is concurrent with the compensable delay.

F. Weather Delays
1. A weather day is defined as a day that the contractor was planning to work in accordance with
the contractor's progress schedule but could not work because of weather or seasonal
conditions that prevented critical path work from occurring for more than half of the working
day.

2. Submit the dates and number of weather days in writing to the engineer weekly for the
engineer's review. The engineer will respond either by accepting or rejecting the weather days
alleged by the contractor. If the engineer rejects the alleged weather days, the engineer will
provide a determination of weather days within 7 calendar days of receiving the list of claimed
weather days. If there is disagreement with the Engineer's determination, submit a written
justification within 7 calendar days of receiving the engineer's list of weather days. The engineer
will review the written justification and will respond within 7 calendar days. If there is
disagreement with the engineer's response, provide notice as required by Section 104.3,
Notification of Contract Changes.

3. Failure to submit weather days at the end of a week will result in the engineer determining the
dates and number of weather days. The engineer will provide the determination of weather
days in response to a written request.

4. Provide for weather and seasonal conditions in the progress schedule in accordance with
Section 108.4.A.2.j. Once the Notice to Proceed date has been established, utilize Table 108.7-1
to determine the total number of anticipated weather days for the project. The Department will
extend contract time by 1-day for each weather day that exceeds the total number of
anticipated weather days for the project.

Table 108.7-1. Anticipated Weather Days per Month
Month Weather Days Month Weather Days
January 20 July 4
February 20 August 4
March 15 September 5
April 10 October 6
May 5 November 10
June 5 December 20

5. If a non-excusable delay extends the performance of the work beyond the contract time, the
contractor is not entitled to time extensions for weather days or seasonal conditions
encountered beyond the contract time, even if the number of weather days exceeds the total
number of weather days anticipated for the project
