Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications
Source: Section 105.6
Requirement ID: CC-10

105.6 Coordination of the Contract Documents.

A. Each individual contract document is an essential part of the contract and a requirement occurring
in one is binding as though occurring in all. The contract documents are complementary and
describe and provide for a complete contract. In the case of a conflict between the contract
documents, the order of precedence is as follows:
1. General Description
2. General Notices
3. Plans
4. Special Provisions
5. Standard Construction Details
6. Standard Specifications
7. Electronic Design Data Files

B. Do not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the contract. Upon discovery of an
error or omission, promptly notify the engineer. The engineer will make corrections and
interpretations as necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract.

C. Plan dimensions take precedence over scaled measurements.

D. Prior to performing the associated work, issue a written Request For Information (RFI) if any
questions arise during the project, if interference or conflict is caused by the design, or if errors
and omissions exist in the contract. The engineer will respond to each RFI in writing clearly
indicating any applicable design revisions.

E. Upon identification of a deviation from the specified sampling or testing procedures or contract by
the contractor, inspector, or any representative thereof, submit for approval a written non-
conformance report (NCR), including its associated corrective actions and plans on how to prevent
future non-conformance events, covering such deviation. Include in the NCR, a description of
construction activity and the location by specification.

F. The Department will require 3 working days from receipt of the written notice to review and
respond to an RFI. The Department will respond by answering the RFI question or by informing the
contractor that the Department will need additional time to review the RFI question
