Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications
Source: Section 104.3
Requirement ID: CC-12

104.3 Notification of Contract Changes.

A. Immediately notify the engineer of the need for a change. Provide the notification in either
written or oral form.

B. Perform work associated with a change only after receiving written direction from the engineer.

C. Within 7 calendar days of the initial notification, provide the engineer with the following
information in writing:
1. The date, nature, and circumstances of the occurrence that constitutes the alleged change.
2. The name, title, and activity of each Department representative aware of the alleged change.
3. Copies or descriptions of documents and written accounts of oral communications associated
with the alleged change.
4. The basis for the position that the work associated with the alleged change is not already
included in the contract.
5. The elements for which the contractor is seeking compensation, including:
a. Affected pay items.
b. Additional labor requirements.
c. Idle labor.
d. Additional equipment.
e. Idle equipment.
f. Additional, eliminated, or wasted materials.
g. Delays.
h. Accelerated performance.
i. Estimated increases or decreases to the contract price or contract time.
j. Estimated time within which the Department must respond to prevent delays or minimize
costs.

D. The Department will consider the contractor's failure to provide the required notice in accordance
with this section as a waiver of entitlement to an increase in the contract price or time due to the
alleged change, provided, however, that if the estimated increase in the contract price is under
$50,000, the Department can waive any of the notice and written information requirements
under this section upon the submission of a written request by the contractor within 30 days of
the recognition of the need for a change.

E. Within 10 calendar days after the receipt of notice, the engineer will respond in writing to the
contractor by:
1. Confirming that there is a change or that a change order is needed and providing direction or
indicating when the Department will provide direction.
2. Denying that there is a change.
3. Advising the contractor that the engineer will need more time to evaluate the alleged change.
4. Advising the contractor that it did not submit enough information for the engineer to determine
if a change exists. The engineer will describe the information needed and identify the date by
which the additional information is needed. The contractor is not entitled to an increase in the
contract price or time for costs or delays resulting from the time the contractor spends
providing the additional required information after the identified date as provided by the
engineer.
5. Advising the contractor that the Department concurs there is a change, but that more
information is required to determine the appropriate increase or decrease in the contract price
or time. The engineer will describe the information needed to make a determination and will
identify the date by which the contractor needs to provide the additional information. If the
engineer does not specify a time for submitting the additional information, submit the
information within 30 calendar days of the date the engineer informed the contractor that
additional information was required.

F. If the contractor disagrees with the engineer's final written response or the engineer's response is
untimely, the contractor may pursue a claim in accordance with Section 105.15, Claims
Resolution. The contractor's failure to comply with the requirements of Section 104.3, Notification
of Contract Changes, is a waiver of the contractor's right to file a claim, provided, however, that if
the increase in the contract price is under $50,000, the Department can waive any of the
requirements under this section upon the submission of a written request by the contractor
within 30 days of the recognition of the need for a change.

G. Submit a waiver request to the Department prior to submitting a claim in accordance with Section
105.15, Claims Resolution. The Department will not consider a waiver request once the
notification of claim as been made in accordance with Section 105.15, Claims Resolution
