Reference: DelDOT Standard Specifications
Source: Section 108.1
Requirement ID: CC-14

108.1 Contract Subletting.

A. Perform no less than 50 percent of total original contract price with the contractor's own
organization, excluding designated specialty items. The Department will allow the contractor to
perform specialty items by subcontract. The Department may deduct the amount of specialty
items, performed by subcontractors, from the total original contract price before calculating the
amount of work the contractor plans to perform using the contractor's own organization. The
contract price that the Department will use as a basis to calculate the 50 percent requirement
includes the cost of material and manufactured products that the contractor plans to purchase or
produce. The Department will not require an adjustment of the calculated percentage due to
adjustments in quantities or added or extra work.
1. The cost of flagging operations, including overtime rates, when performed by others who are not
the Contractor's employees, will not be included in the 50 percent subcontracting limit.

B. The term "subcontractors" as used in the previous paragraph, does not include suppliers that
deliver and deposit, but do not incorporate, material; suppliers or services that transport material;
and work performed that does not physically advance the completion of the contract and is not
considered as an item of work.

C. The term "the contractor's own organization" refers to workers employed by or leased by the
contractor and equipment owned or rented by the contractor with or without operators. The term
does not include subcontractor employees or equipment, agents of the contractor, or any other
assignees. The term may include payments for the costs of hiring leased employees from an
employee leasing firm if the contractor:
1. Controls the day-to-day activities of leased employees;
2. retains responsibility for the quality of work performed by leased employees;
3. retains all power to accept or exclude individual employees from work on the project; and
4. remains responsible for payment of predetermined minimum wages, payroll submissions,
compliance statements, and all other federal regulatory requirements.

D. The Department will identify the specialty items in the contract.

E. Do not sublet, sell, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract without the
engineer's written consent. Consent, when given, does not relieve the contractor its responsibility
to fulfill the contract requirements. Do not provide work or materials from an organization other
than the contractor's own, or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion
thereof, or of its right, title or interest therein, without written consent from the engineer. The
engineer will only provide written consent after assurance that each subcontract is in writing and
that it contains the pertinent provisions and requirements of the contract.

F. Outline the scope and value of work the contractor proposes to subcontract. If requested by the
engineer, detail the cost of the materials included in the subcontractor's work. Include the cost of
subcontractor materials in the value of the subcontracted work. Obtain the engineer's written
permission before allowing a subcontractor to subcontract a portion of subcontracted work. In
granting such permission, the engineer will require that the subcontractor seeking to subcontract a portion of its subcontract to perform no less than 50 percent of its subcontract with the
subcontractor using its own organization.

G. Perform traffic control work and related items with labor, equipment, and materials from the
contractor's own organization and a single subcontractor unless approved by the engineer.

H. When the contractor subcontracts a portion of the contract to a subcontractor, the Department
will apply the subcontractor payment to fulfill the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE)
contract requirements if the subcontractor is a DBE. The cost of the portion of the contract or bid
item performed by a DBE will be included in the total amount of work subcontracted by the
contractor in determining whether the contractor is performing at least 50 percent of the total
contract bid price, as required by this section.

I. Submit certified copies of subcontractor agreements and copies of the subcontractors' Delaware
business licenses as a prerequisite to payment for work performed by a subcontractor, or on a
subcontractor's behalf. Submit the information before a subcontractor performs work on the
project. Submit contracts with suppliers or any other person, firm, or organization that will
perform work on the project for review and approval by the engineer. Ensure that each
subcontract clearly states that all provisions and requirements of the contract are included in the
subcontract.

J. The Department may also require the contractor to submit additional information concerning the
prospective subcontractor or supplier. This information may include any required by the contract,
by the Department, by the FHWA, or by other governmental agencies. This information may
include:
1. Evidence that the organization that performs the work is experienced and equipped for such
work.
2. Assurance by the contractor that the labor standards provisions set forth in this contract apply
to labor performed on all work encompassed by the contract.
3. Assurance that all civil rights provisions and DBE requirements have been satisfied.

J. Include the following provisions in all subcontracts:
1. Indemnification language that saves harmless the Department from the actions of the
subcontractors or suppliers;
2. provisions that provide for the binding arbitration of all disputes between the parties to the
subcontract agreements; and
3. provisions that save harmless and indemnify the Department for omissions in the subcontract
agreement.

K. Do not interpret Department reviews, permissions, or granted approvals under these
specifications as approval of the work a subcontractor performs or of material provided by a
supplier. Such reviews, permissions, or approvals by the Department do not relieve the contractor
of the sole responsibility for satisfactory completion of the contract. Contracts, subcontracts,
supplier agreements, sales, transfers, leases, assignments, or any other agreements applicable to
this contract will in any case release the contractor of its sole responsibility and liability under the
contract and bonds.

L. The Department may refuse to pay for, or accept, all or part of the work or materials supplied by a
subcontractor or materials supplier the contractor failed to submit to the Department for approval or by a subcontractor or material supplier that the contractor did submit that the
Department did not approve
